Language is the specifically human capacity for acquiring and using
complex systems of communication, and a language is a specific instance
of such a system of complex communication. The scientific study of
language in any of its senses is called linguistics. It is impossible to
know precisely how many languages are in the world, and any number
depends on a partly arbitrary distinction between languages and
dialects, but estimates vary from around 5000 to 7000. Natural languages
are spoken or signed, but any language can be encoded into secondary
media using auditory, visual or tactile stimuli for example in graphic
writing, whistling or braille. This is because human language language
is modality independent. When used as a general concept, "language" may
refer to the cognitive ability that enables humans to learn and use
systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that
makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced
from those rules.

Human language is unique among the lifeforms of Earth because its
complex structure affords a much wider range of possible expressions and
uses than any known system of animal communication, all of which are
generally closed systems, with limited functions and mostly genetically
rather than socially transmitted. In contrast to non-human communication
forms, human language has the properties of productivity, recursivity,
and displacement. Human language is also the only system to rely mostly
on social convention and learning. Language is thought to have
originated when early hominins first started cooperating, gradually
changing their primate communication systems as they acquired the
ability to form a theory of other minds and shared intentionality. This
development is thought to have coincided with an increase in brain
volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having
evolved to serve specific communicative functions. Language is processed
in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in
Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. Humans acquire language through social
interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently
when they are around three years old. The use of language is deeply
entrenched in human culture. Therefore, in addition to its strictly
communicative uses, language also has many social and cultural uses,
such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as for
social grooming and entertainment.

All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs with
particular meanings. Oral and sign languages contain a phonological
system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as
words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and
morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances. Languages evolve
and diversify over time, and the history of their evolution can be
reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits
their ancestral languages must have had for the later stages to have
occurred. A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is
known as a language family. The languages that are most spoken in the
world today belong to the Indo-European family, which includes languages
such as English, Spanish, Portuguese, Russian and Hindi; the
Sino-Tibetan languages, which include Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese and
many others; Semitic languages, which include Arabic, Amharic and
Hebrew; and the Bantu languages, which include Swahili, Zulu, Shona and
hundreds of other languages spoken throughout Africa. The general
consensus is that between 50 to 90% of languages spoken today will
probably have become extinct by the year 2100.

Theories about the origin of language can be divided according to their
basic assumptions. Some theories are based on the idea that language is
so complex that one can not imagine it simply appearing from nothing in
its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier
pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors. These theories can
be called continuity-based theories. The opposite viewpoint is that
language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to
anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared
fairly suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man. These
theories can be defined as discontinuity-based. Similarly, some theories
see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically
encoded, while others see it as a system that is largely cultural, that
is learned through social interaction. Currently the only prominent
proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins is
linguist and philosopher Noam Chomsky. Chomsky proposes that 'some
random mutation took place, maybe after some strange cosmic ray shower,
and it reorganized the brain, implanting a language organ in an
otherwise primate brain'. While cautioning against taking this story too
literally, Chomsky insists that 'it may be closer to reality than many
other fairy tales that are told about evolutionary processes, including
language'. Continuity-based theories are currently held by a majority of
scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development. Those who
see language as being mostly innate, for example psychologist Steven
Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who
see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as
psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal
communication, either primate gestural or vocal communication. Other
continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a
view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt and Charles Darwin.
A prominent proponent of this view today is archaeologist Steven Mithen.

Because the emergence of language is located in the early prehistory of
man, the relevant developments have left no direct historical traces and
no comparable processes can be observed today. Theories that stress
continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates
display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human
language must have been like. Alternatively, early human fossils can be
inspected to look for traces of physical adaptation to language use or
for traces of pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour.

It is mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have
communication systems significantly different from those found in great
apes in general, but scholarly opinions vary as to the developments
since the appearance of the genus Homo some 2.5 million years ago. Some
scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems
(proto-language) as early as Homo habilis (2.3 million years ago), while
others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only
with Homo erectus (1.8 million years ago) or Homo heidelbergensis (0.6
million years ago) and the development of language proper with
Anatomically Modern Homo sapiens with the Upper Paleolithic revolution
less than 100,000 years ago.
